Rought draft of  Napari x Xarray blog post with a roadmap (#16)
napari/island-dispatch: source/blog/napari-xarray.md

```{raw} html
<div style="text-align: center;">
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay muted loop
         aria-label="Video of Napari in action showing multidimensional image visualization"
         title="Napari GUI demonstration - Biological data">
    <source src="https://napari.org/stable/_static/images/tribolium.webm" type="video/webm">
    <p>Video of Napari in action showing multidimensional image visualization with GPU-backed rendering and physical coordinate support. Your browser does not support the video tag.</p>
  </video>
</div>
```

However, there are still several key pain points around managing image metadata when using Napari.

- Users think in physical units (microns, lat/lon) rather than pixels
- Re-indexing dimensions (e.g. Fiji’s Stack to HyperStack) is difficult with unnamed dimensions  
- Dimensionality reductions can lead to incorrect dimension mappings in the viewer due to dropping of singleton dimensions.
  - For example, a max projected image stack will no longer respond to the correct sliders as the base image (`TCZYX` vs `TCYX`)

> - Users expect that provided dimension names will be matched to viewer dimension names, but presently adding a `TCZYX` image and `TYX` image will lead to the `TYX` image being aligned with `ZYX` in the viewer.

Author: You're referring to the last one right? I really struggled with how to say this simply. maybe this is something where we need a visual example to show people.

author: Ian Hunt-Isaak, Tim Monko
location: World
category: news, help-wanted
language: English
---

# Seamless Xarray Integration with Napari - Plan from SciPy 2025

```{note}
This post is cross-posted on the [Xarray blog](https://xarray.dev/blog).
```

## What and Why

[Napari](https://napari.org/stable/) is a high-performance GPU-backed multidimensional array viewer with support for physical coordinates, data annotation, 2 and 3D visualization, and a plugin infrastructure allowing users to customize it to their needs.

```{raw} html
<div style="text-align: center;">
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay muted loop
         aria-label="Video of Napari in action showing multidimensional image visualization"
         title="Napari GUI demonstration - Biological data">
    <source src="https://napari.org/stable/_static/images/tribolium.webm" type="video/webm">
    <p>Video of Napari in action showing multidimensional image visualization with GPU-backed rendering and physical coordinate support. Your browser does not support the video tag.</p>
  </video>
</div>
```

However, there are still several key pain points around managing image metadata when using Napari.

> - Users think in physical units (microns, lat/lon) rather than pixels

Reviewer: Most? 😉

- Re-indexing dimensions (e.g. Fiji’s Stack to HyperStack) is difficult with unnamed dimensions  
- Dimensionality reductions can lead to incorrect dimension mappings in the viewer due to dropping of singleton dimensions.
  - For example, a max projected image stack will no longer respond to the correct sliders as the base image (`TCZYX` vs `TCYX`)

> - Users expect that provided dimension names will be matched to viewer dimension names, but presently adding a `TCZYX` image and `TYX` image will lead to the `TYX` image being aligned with `ZYX` in the viewer.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users expect that provided dimension names will be matched to viewer dimension names, but napari right-aligns axes, so if you add an image with axes `TYX` to a viewer with a `TCZYX` image, then the axes of the `TYX` image will be aligned with the 3 right-most axes, so `ZYX`, in the viewer.
```

        style="border: 1px solid #ccc; border-radius: 5px; margin: 10px 0;">
</iframe>
```

Having Napari leverage the Xarray metadata will not only improve the experience of Napari users but also provide Xarray users with a polished interactive visualization tool.

```{raw} html
<div style="text-align: center;">
  <video width="100%" controls autoplay muted loop
         aria-label="Video of Napari displaying geographic data with coordinate systems"
         title="Napari GUI demonstration - Geographic data">
    <source src="../_static/geo-in-napari.mov" type="video/mp4">
    <p>Video of Napari displaying geographic data with proper coordinate system handling. Your browser does not support the video tag.</p>
  </video>
</div>
```

This potential for Napari and Xarray to bring out the best in each other is not a new insight.
In fact, the second oldest open issue on Napari [`#14`](https://github.com/napari/napari/issues/14) is titled “Pass xarray to napari-gui for autolabeling sliders.”
That issue's age is a testament to the difficulty of the problems involved in this integration.

But something being hard is not a reason not to try to do it.

> Indeed, one of the most successful plugins for Napari is [napari-aicsimageio](https://github.com/AllenCellModeling/napari-aicsimageio) which is built on top of [aicsimageio](https://github.com/AllenCellModeling/aicsimageio) (now superseded by [bioio](https://bioio-devs.github.io/bioio/OVERVIEW.html)), whose data model is backed by xarray.

Reviewer 2: haha that was me vs Ian. I used lower case and he used upper and I told him to pick one (our preference seems to be lower, when its stylistically appropriate)

> Indeed, one of the most successful plugins for Napari is [napari-aicsimageio](https://github.com/AllenCellModeling/napari-aicsimageio) which is built on top of [aicsimageio](https://github.com/AllenCellModeling/aicsimageio) (now superseded by [bioio](https://bioio-devs.github.io/bioio/OVERVIEW.html)), whose data model is backed by xarray.

Reviewer: Well, napari should be canonically lower case. 
Other than the logo, Xarray docs appear to consistently use Xarray whether at the start of a sentence or not. So it should be Xarray here as well.

Yet, both Napari and Xarray have recently implemented important changes that make this problem easier to solve.
With this in mind both a group of Napari and Xarray developers are committed to improving the integration of Napari and Xarray.

## How

> ### SciPY 2025

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### SciPy 2025
```

> Thanks to generous support from the Chan Zuckerberg Institute the napari, Xarray, and [CellProfiler](https://cellprofiler.org/) team members were able to attend SciPy 2025. At the sprints members of these three teams—Ian Hunt-Isaak, Tim Monko, Nodar Gogoberidze, Peter Psobolewski and Carol Willing—collaborated to develop a plan for enhancing the integration of Xarray with Napari. The rest of this blog post is the initial roadmap we came up with for better integration of Xarray and Napari.

Reviewer: Sorry for the lateness, but I do prefer my actual last name, Sobolewski.

  - [`Dataset`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/user-guide/data-structures.html#dataset) -> Multiple Layers
  - [`DataTree`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/user-guide/data-structures.html#datatree) -> Multiple Layers + Pyramidal Viewing (if applicable)

**Implementation:** Script or plugin level, no Napari core changes required.

#### 2: Meaningful Physical Units (Enhancement)

The next step is to map array indices to Xarray coordinates. This is harder than the previous step as it involves Napari's viewer dims model, which is more complex than the layer metadata.

**Goal:** Display physical values instead of array indices in Napari sliders and use coordinate information for proper scaling.

**Key Functionality:**

- Show slider values as physical units (e.g., `20.5` microns) using Xarray [Coordinates](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/user-guide/data-structures.html#coordinates)
- Use Xarray coordinates to map pixel sizes for accurate scale bars

**Implementation:** First at script/plugin level, with eventual integration into Napari core.

#### 3: "Magic" Reordering (Complex)

> Today, if you mix up the order of your axes in some pathological way (e.g. `lat, time, lon`, or `XCZSYT`) and pass it to Napari it will display as is, because it does not know about the axes! With knowledge of metadata and the conventions of a field Napari could magically re-order the array to display in the "correct" order. This is a significant jump in complexity due to the magic involved - the system will need to correctly guess user intent, which can be challenging.

Author: This is a much clearer and empathetic section with these edits

> **Goal:** Handle a few clear cases of problematic dimension ordering, not solve the general case of arbitrary reordering.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Goal:** Handle a few clear cases of non-standard dimension ordering, not solve the general case of arbitrary reordering.
```

#### 1: Basic Metadata Mapping (Proof of Concept)

This first step is the easiest, as it requires no changes to napari's core and can be implemented in a simple script or plugin.

**Goal:** Ingest Xarray data into napari's layer metadata to provide immediate context to the user.

**Key Functionality:**

- Auto-label sliders with Xarray dimension names (e.g., `'Z'`, `'Time'`)
- Assign layer names from Xarray's `.name` attribute
- Automatically transform:
  - [`DataArray`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/user-guide/data-structures.html#dataarray) -> Layer
  - [`Dataset`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/user-guide/data-structures.html#dataset) -> Multiple Layers
  - [`DataTree`](https://docs.xarray.dev/en/latest/user-guide/data-structures.html#datatree) -> Multiple Layers + Pyramidal Viewing (if applicable)

**Implementation:** Script or plugin level, no napari core changes required. This will be an opportunity 

> **napari enhancement** napari has laid the groundwork for success here with the ability to include `axis_labels` and `units` on layers in [this pr](https://github.com/napari/napari/pull/6979). The remaining work is to close the gap by adding connections from the napari layer list to the napari dims model. This improvement will help all napari users, not just those using xarray.

Author: >   Not quite done with a full read through but I've left a few comments for now. Most important is that we already have axis_labels on layers and we should hook that up to the dims model!

in the spirit of finishing this, and brevity to keep the reader engaged I added this section that gets at what I htink @jni was suggesting without getting too caught up in detailed planning here.

Reviewer 3: I like the framing of this. Let's go for it.

---
blogpost: true
date: Oct 20, 2025
author: Ian Hunt-Isaak, Tim Monko
location: World
category: news, help-wanted
language: English
---

# Xarray ❤️ napari

> 

Author: in addition to the date in the frontmatter?

> 

Reviewer 2: yes, otherwise it doesn't show up in the blog itself. And i think it would be nice to have a dated history of when these announcements are
